Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is a free,
complete course for the CCNA. If you like
these videos, please subscribe to follow along
with the series. Also, please like and leave
a comment, and share the video to help spread
this free series of videos. Thanks for your
help. In this video we will look at JSON,
XML, and YAML. These are known as data serialization
languages, or data serialization formats.
These allow us to format or structure data
in a standardized way so it can be communicated
between applications. This is covered in exam
topic 6.7, which says you must be able to
interpret JSON encoded data. Note that it
only mentions JSON, not XML or YAML. So, the
majority of this video will focus on JSON,
but at the end I will take a bit of time to
compare JSON to two other popular data serialization
languages, XML and YAML.
Here’s what we’ll cover in this video.
First I’ll briefly introduce data serialization
and why we need it. Then I’ll cover JSON.
This will be the main part of this video,
and we’ll focus on how to interpret basic
JSON-encoded data. Then I’ll briefly introduce
XML and YAML, so you can compare and contrast
them with JSON. However I won’t spend so
much time on those two, since they’re not
mentioned in the exam topics list. And make
sure to watch until the end of the video for
a bonus practice question from Boson Software’s
ExSim, the best practice exams for the CCNA.
So, let’s take a look at what data serialization
is. It is the process of converting data into
a standardized format, or structure, that
can be stored, for example in a file, or transmitted,
for example over a network, and then be reconstructed
later, perhaps by a different application.
Why is that useful? It allows the data to
be communicated between applications in a
way both applications can understand. If one
application is written in Python, and the
other is written in Java, both languages store
data differently so they need some standard
format to send data between each other. Data
serialization languages, for example JSON,
allow us to represent variables with text.
Now, what is a variable? Here are some examples
of variables. Interface name, gigabitethernet1/1.
Status, up. IP address, 192.168.1.1. Netmask,
255.255.255.0. These are four variables. Basically,
variables are containers that store values.
For example ‘interface_name’ is a container,
and it contains the value ‘gigabitethernet1/1’
inside of it. ‘Status’ is another container,
and inside there is the value ‘up’. So,
let’s see how data exchanges would work
without the use of a standard data serialization
format. The client, for example an app trying
to get information from an SDN controller,
sends a GET message. The server, the controller,
sends those variables directly to the client
without converting them to a standard format
like JSON. However, the client doesn’t understand
the data it received. The app and the controller
are programs written in different languages
and they store data differently, they can’t
communicate directly.
So let’s see how a data serialization language
such as JSON fixes that. The client sends
a GET request. The requested variables are
sent to the API, which converts them to a
standard format, JSON, and sends them over
the network to the client. Because the variables
are in a standard format that both the client
and the server understand, the client is able
to take those variables and convert them into
its own native format. Now, we haven’t looked
at any details about how APIs work yet, I
will cover them in the next video. So, this
process might not be totally clear for you
yet, but I’m sure you can see the benefit
of having a standard data format like JSON
to allow these two programs to share data
with each other.
Now let’s take a look at JSON. JSON, which
stands for JavaScript Object Notation, is
an open standard file format and data interchange
format, meaning it can be used to store data
as files or to send data over a network, that
uses human-readable text to store and transmit
data objects. So, although it’s used to
exchange data between machines, so it must
be easily machine-readable of course, it’s
also quite human-readable. It’s easy for
us to read and understand. It is standardized
in RFC 8259, which you can access at this
URL. Or just do a google search for RFC 8259.
I recommend taking the time to read it. If
you’re not used to reading technical documentation
like this it might be a bit difficult to understand
at first, but it’s the best source to really
understand JSON. Anyway, JSON was derived
from JavaScript, but it is language-independent
and many modern programming languages are
able to generate and read JSON data. Note
that REST APIs often use JSON, which is why
Cisco expects you to learn the basics of JSON
for the CCNA exam. In JSON, whitespace is
insignificant. What does that mean? Well,
I’ll demonstrate with examples later, but
basically it means that spaces and linebreaks
don’t matter. They don’t change the meaning
of the data. In JSON, there are four primitive
data types. In the next slide I’ll demonstrate
them, but they are string, number, boolean,
and null. In addition, there are two structured
data types, object and array. Let’s look
at these six data types and see how JSON data
is actually formatted.
First up, the primitive data types. A string
is a text value, and it is surrounded by double
quotes. Here are some examples of strings.
Hello. Notice that it is surrounded by double
quotes. This means it is a string, a series
of alphanumeric characters. These are all
also strings. So, remember that if it’s
contained within double quotes, it’s a string,
a simple text value. Next, a number is simply
a numeric value. It is not surrounded by quotes.
So, 5, 100, or any other number. Note that
the five in the string examples with the double
quotes is a string, a text value, but the
5 down here without double quotes is a number,
a numeric value. They are different data types.
Next, a boolean is a data type that has only
two possible values. Those are true and false.
Note that they are written without quotes.
In a networking setting, perhaps on an OSPF-enabled
interface a variable named ‘passive’ would
have the boolean value ‘true’ if the interface
is passive, and if the interface isn’t passive
the variable would have the boolean value
‘false’. That’s just one example of
how boolean values could be used. Note that
in the string examples I included “true”
with double quotes. That isn’t a boolean
value, that’s just the word ‘true’,
a series of letters. However when written
without double quotes, it is a boolean value.
Finally, note that they are written all lower-case,
no capital T in true or capital F in false.
The final primitive data type is null, which
represents the intentional absence of any
object value. It’s simply written as null,
lower case n u l l, without quotes. This simply
means there is no value, it means nothing.
Again, in the string examples I included “null”
in double quotes. That is a string, because
it is contained within double quotes. It does
not express a null value, it just means the
word ‘null’. Okay, those are the four
primitive JSON data types. String, number,
boolean, and null.
Now let’s go on to the structured data types,
there are two. First, an object is an unordered
list of key-value pairs, basically variables.
Unordered means the order of the variables
doesn’t matter. Objects are surrounded by
curly brackets. The key, which is basically
the name of the variable, the container, must
be a string. So, it must use double quotes.
Then the value inside of that variable can
be any valid JSON data type. A string, number,
boolean, null, object, or array. The key and
the value are separated by a colon, and if
there are multiple key-value pairs in the
object, each pair is separated by a comma.
Okay, let’s look at some examples to help
you visualize it. This is one JSON object.
Note the curly bracket at the top indicating
the start of the object, and the curly bracket
closing it at the bottom. Inside there are
five key-value pairs. Before looking at this
object in more detail, I want to show you
this. This is the exact same object. As I
said before, in JSON whitespace is insignificant,
it has no meaning. Of course, for humans the
one on the left is easier to read, but computers
don’t care either way.
So, I’ve colored the keys blue and the values
red. All of this is one JSON object, but let’s
look at the data type of each individual key
and value. First, the top one. “interface”
in double quotes, that’s the key. Then notice
a colon separating the key and the value,
which is “gigabitethernet1/1” in double
quotes. So, the key and value are both strings,
they both have double quotes. Remember that
the key must be a string, but the value can
be any valid JSON data type. Notice that there
is a comma after as well, because if there
are multiple key-value pairs in an object,
each pair is separated by a comma. Okay, in
the next key-value pair under it the key is
“is_up”. It’s a string, of course. Notice
the colon between the key “is_up” and
the value, which is true, written without
double quotes. That is a boolean. This probably
indicates that the interface status is up,
because of the value true for the key “is_up”.
Again, notice the comma after this key-value
pair, because there is another key-value pair
after it. For these next two examples, the
values are both strings, because they are
contained within double quotes. Notice the
standard JSON formatting again. The key is
always a string, there is a colon between
the key and value, and there is a comma after
each key-value pair. Now let’s look at the
final pair. What data type is the value 1000?
It’s a number, a numeric value not contained
in double quotes. And notice that this time
there is no comma after the value. That’s
because it’s the last key-value pair in
this object. Okay, so that’s a basic JSON
object with multiple key-value pairs inside.
Now, as you can see in the following example,
objects are a valid data type for the value
of a key-value pair. I’ve colored the curly
brackets to make it a bit easier to see, but
I want you to pause the video to try to interpret
this data. Find the key value pairs. It’s
important that you get comfortable reading
JSON-formatted data, as it’s clearly stated
in the CCNA exam. Okay, so this example is
one JSON object, indicated by the red curly
brackets at the top and bottom. Inside of
this object there are two key-value pairs.
Here’s one key-value pair. The key is “device”,
a string of course, and the value is an object,
indicated by the blue curly brackets. So,
we have an object inside of an object. Note
that objects within objects are called ‘nested
objects’. Now, within that value, the object,
there are multiple key-value pairs. “name”:”R1”
is a key-value pair, “vendor”:”Cisco”
is a key-value pair, and “model”:”1101”
is a key-value pair. Now down here we have
one more key-value pair, and again the value
is an object, indicated by the purple curly
brackets. And inside of that object there
are again more key-value pairs. I’m keeping
this fairly easy to read by using indenting
and using line breaks and different colors,
but keep in mind that JSON data won’t always
look like this. The whitespace is insignificant
and only used to make it easier for us to
read, but applications themselves don’t
need this whitespace.
Okay, now there is one more JSON structured
data type to look at, and that is the array.
An array is a series of values separated by
commas. Note that it’s not a series of key-value
pairs, that’s an object. It’s just a series
of values. And note that the values don’t
have to be the same data type. One could be
a string, and another a number, for example.
So, here I’ve got one JSON object with two
key-value pairs, and both of the values are
arrays. The first array, the value of the
“interfaces” key, lists three interface
names, with a comma between each of them.
Note that there is no comma after gigabitethernet1/3,
because it’s the last value. And then the
second array has two values, “Hi” and
5. Note that “Hi” is a string and 5 is
a number, because it has no double quotes.
So, as you can see the values don’t necessarily
have to be the same type, although often they
will be. If you need to, pause the video now
to look at this example and make sure you
understand it, as well as the previous examples.
Just listening to me talk about JSON won’t
help you interpret it if you don’t practice
actually looking at and understanding JSON-formatted
data.
For reference, here is the output of SHOW
IP INTERFACE BRIEF, and a version of the same
output in JSON. Note that this isn’t actual
JSON output from a Cisco device, I just wrote
this JSON data myself. The point is that,
although SHOW command outputs in the CLI are
easy for us humans to read, they aren’t
in a format that is easy for computers to
understand. JSON, on the other hand, is very
easy for computers to understand, and if we
format the text properly like this it’s
also quite human-readable too. Anyway, pause
the video if you want to compare this SHOW
command output and the JSON data.
Okay, so we’ve looked at all of the six
JSON data types. There are four primitive
data types: string, number, boolean, and null,
and two structured data types: object and
array. One more point, note that an object
is sometimes called a dictionary. Same thing,
just a different name, but you should be aware
of it. Okay, that’s all for JSON for now.
We’ll take a quick look at XML and YAML,
and then in the quiz for today’s video we’ll
get lots of practice interpreting JSON data.
So, here’s XML. XML was developed as a markup
language, but is now used as a general data
serialization language. You know what a data
serialization language is, but what’s a
markup language? Markup languages are used
to format text, for example HTML, which you’ve
probably heard of, is a markup language. XML
is generally less human-readable than JSON,
although it’s not so difficult to read.
Like JSON, whitespace is insignificant, although
you’ll often see it displayed with spaces
and line breaks to make it more human-readable.
XML is also often used by REST APIs, same
as JSON. The general format you need to know
is this: the key is tagged like this, with
the value in the middle. For example, on Cisco
IOS you can use a SHOW command, pipe the command
with the FORMAT keyword, and it will display
it in XML. I used SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF,
pipe, FORMAT, and here is the output in XML
format. I’ve colored the output to make
it easier to see, so I think you can easily
see the keys and values. We have two interfaces,
each marked with ENTRY tags. Within each entry
we have Interface, IP-address, OK, Method,
Status, and Protocol keys, and the value is
in the middle of those keys. For example,
here we have an <Interface> tag, with a value
of GigabitEthernet0/0, and then a forward
slash interface tag to close it off.
And here you can compare the regular SHOW
IP INTERFACE BRIEF output with the XML-formatted
output, without any coloring in the XML this
time. XML is generally thought to be less
human-readable than JSON, but it’s still
not so hard to read when formatted like this.
So, that’s all I’ll say about XML. If
you’re familiar with HTML, it looks quite
similar. Remember basic characteristics like
the key-value pair format for variables using
tags, remember that whitespace is insignificant,
and remember that it’s similar to HTML and
also used by REST APIs. If you want to take
some time to examine this output pause the
video, but now I’ll move on.
Finally, let’s take a brief look at YAML.
The name YAML originally meant Yet Another
Markup Language, but to distinguish its purpose
as a data-serialization language rather than
a markup language, it was repurposed to YAML
Aint Markup Language. That’s known as a
recursive acronym by the way, when the acronym
itself is part of the acronym. YAML is used
by the network automation tool Ansible, which
we’ll cover in another video. It has all
sorts of other uses too, of course, but its
use in Ansible is relevant to our current
topic, network automation. YAML is very human-readable,
and whitespace is significant, unlike JSON
and XML. So, indentation is very important.
We aren’t free to format the text however
we want. YAML files start with three hyphens,
and one hyphen is used to indicate a list.
Key value pairs are represented as key colon
value. There are more rules to YAML, of course,
but I’ll leave it there. Here’s an example
of YAML. This is the same SHOW IP INTERFACE
BRIEF data I showed you in JSON and XML. It
looks quite simple compared to JSON and XML.
And for comparison, here it is next to JSON.
As you can see, both languages are quite human-readable,
and they’re also used by applications to
communicate data. So, that’s all I’ll
say about YAML. You don’t need to know it
or XML as much as you need to know JSON, but
you should know basic things such as the fact
that whitespace is significant in YAML, and
that it’s used in Ansible, because we’ll
be studying Ansible in a future video.
Here’s what we covered in this video. I
gave a basic introduction to data serialization
and why we need it. Basically, it’s to provide
a standard data format so applications can
communicate the data with each other. Then
I introduced JSON, XML, and YAML, focusing
primarily on JSON because it’s the one you
really need to know for the CCNA. Now, in
today’s quiz I will give more questions
than usual so you can practice reading and
interpreting JSON data. And make sure to watch
until the end of the quiz for a bonus question
from Boson Software’s ExSim, the best practice
exams for the CCNA. Okay, let’s go to quiz
question 1.
In which of the following data serialization
languages is whitespace significant? Pause
the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, YAML. In JSON and XML
whitespace is not significant, it has no meaning.
However in YAML whitespace is significant,
so things like indentation are very important.
Okay, let’s go to question 2.
Which of the following data serialization
languages formats key-value pairs like this?
Key, value, and then forward slash key. Pause
the video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, XML. XML uses HTML-like
tags like this to indicate key-value pairs.
Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following is NOT a valid JSON
data type? Pause the video now to select the
best answer.
Okay, the answer is E, key. Although JSON
defines key-value pairs, key isn’t actually
a data type. All keys must be strings, and
string is a valid data type. Okay, let’s
go to question 4.
Examine the JSON-formatted data. Which of
the following statements is true? Pause the
video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, there are too many
commas. Here I’ve highlighted the extra
comma. A comma is required between separate
key-value pairs in an object, but you should
not put a comma after the last key-value pair.
Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Examine the JSON-formatted data. Which of
the following statements is true? Pause the
video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is B, the value of “ip_interfaces”
is an array. Now, within that array there
are multiple objects, but as these square
brackets indicate, the value itself is an
array, that’s the JSON data type. Okay,
let’s go to question 6.
Which of the following is an example of valid
JSON-formatted data? Pause the video now to
select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is D. Let me point out the
errors in the others. In A, there is a comma
after the “interfaces” key. It should
be a colon. In B, there is a colon after this
value 5. A colon should only be used between
the key and value of a key-value pair, it
is not valid here. And in C, there is a missing
comma between gigabitethernet1/1 and gigabitethernet1/2.
If multiple values are listed in an array,
there must be a comma between each of them.
There are no problems with D, it is valid
JSON data. Okay, let’s go to question 7.
Examine the JSON-formatted data. Which of
the following statements is true? Pause the
video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is A, the value of “is_up”
is a boolean. I’ve highlighted it here.
It’s true, written without double quotes,
so it is a boolean value. Booleans can be
true or false, and they are written without
quotes. Okay, let’s go to question 8.
Examine the JSON-formatted data. Which of
the following statements is true? Pause the
video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is D, it is valid JSON data.
No comma or curly brackets are missing, and
whitespace is insignificant in JSON, so this
is validly formatted. We often use indentation
and line breaks to make it easier to read,
but whitespace like that is unnecessary and
doesn’t have any meaning in JSON. Okay,
let’s go to question 9.
Examine the JSON-formatted data. Which of
the following statements is true? I think
this question will be a bit more of a challenge.
Make sure each opening curly bracket has a
closing curly bracket, each opening square
bracket has a closing square bracket, each
string has double quotes, etc. Pause the video
to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is C, a square bracket is
missing. The value of the “routes” key
is an array, it has an opening square bracket,
but in the example on the left there is no
closing square bracket for that array. Again,
make sure to check carefully that each opening
bracket has a closing bracket. Let’s go
to question 10.
Examine the JSON-formatted data. Which of
the following statements is true? Pause the
video now to select the best answer.
Okay, the answer is A, it is valid JSON data.
There are no missing curly brackets or square
brackets, and the value of “dhcp4” is
a string, not a boolean. Okay, I hope this
practice was helpful for you. That’s all
for the quiz. Now let’s take a look at a
bonus question from Boson Software’s ExSim
for CCNA.